>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, MAY 24:
NEW CRITICISM FROM THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION THAT IRAQI FORCES
SHOWED "NO WILL TO FIGHT" FOR
RAMADI.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
COLORADO'S LEGALIZATION OF
MARIJUANA HAS ANGERED SOME
NEIGHBORING STATES.
NOW THEY'RE SUING.
>> IT'S STILL ILLEGAL HERE.
WE DON'T HAVE A CHOICE.
WE HAVE TO ENFORCE THE LAW.
>> Sreenivasan: AND SOME
PERSPECTIVE ON THE DEATH OF A
NOBEL PRIZE WINNING
MATHEMATICIAN.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
NEW CRITICISM OF IRAQI TROOPS IS
CASTING DOUBT ON WHETHER THEY
CAN ACTUALLY BEAT BACK ISIS IN
MAJOR CITIES.
THE U.S. SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
COMMENTED FOR THE FIRST TIME
SINCE MILITANTS TOOK THE CITY OF
RAMADI, TELLING C.N.N. THAT
IRAQI FORCES PULLED BACK EVEN
THOUGH THEY VASTLY OUTNUMBERED
THE ISIS FIGHTERS.
>> WHAT APPARENTLY HAPPENED WAS
THAT THE IRAQI FORCES JUST
SHOWED NO WILL TO FIGHT.
AIR-STRIKES ARE EFFECTIVE, BUT
NEITHER THEY NOR ANYTHING THEY
DO CAN SUBSTITUTE FOR THE IRAQI
FORCES WILL TO FIGHT.
THEY ARE THEY ONES WHO HAVE TO
BEAT ISIL.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME 3,000 U.S.
MILITARY PERSONNEL ARE SERVING
IN NON-COMBAT AREAS, RIGHT NOW,
RESTRICTED TO TRAINING IRAQI
FIGHTERS.
HOWEVER, SENATOR JOHN MCCAIN
TOLD CBS' "FACE THE NATION" HE
WANTS TO SEND THOUSANDS MORE
AMERICAN TROOPS TO JOIN THE
FIGHT AGAINST ISIS.
>> FORWARD AIR CONTROLLERS,
SPECIAL FORCES, TRAINING,
EQUIPPING.
RIGHT NOW IT'S SHIA MILITIA, THE
SAME ONES THAT WE FOUGHT AGAINST
DURING THE SURGE THAT ARE NOW
DOING THE FIGHTING.
>> Sreenivasan: MEANWHILE, ISIS
IS GAINING GROUND IN SYRIA.
GOVERNMENT T.V. REPORTS
MILITANTS KILLED AT LEAST 400
PEOPLE IN PALMYRA, INCLUDING
WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
THE ISIS FLAG IS FLYING OVER THE
CITY'S ANCIENT RUINS.
IN CLEVELAND, THE POLICE CHIEF
SAYS DEMONSTRATORS WILL BE
ALLOWED TO MARCH DURING
TONIGHT'S NBA PLAYOFF GAME AT
QUICKEN LOANS ARENA, AS LONG AS
THE PROTESTS REMAIN PEACEFUL.
YESTERDAY'S PROTESTS WERE MOSTLY
PEACEFUL IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING
THE ACQUITTAL OF POLICE OFFICER
MICHAEL BRELO.
BUT BY THE END OF THE NIGHT,
POLICE HAD ARRESTED 71
DEMONSTRATORS, SOME OF WHOM WERE
ACCUSED OF ASSAULTING INNOCENT
BYSTANDERS.
THE PROTESTS BEGAN AFTER OFFICER
BRELO WAS CLEARED OF ALL CHARGES
IN THE SHOOTING DEATHS OF TWO
UNARMED BLACK SUSPECTS.
NEGOTIATORS ARE CLAIMING THEY'VE
MADE PROGRESS DURING INTENSE
TALKS OVER IRAN'S NUCLEAR
PROGRAM.
BUT IRAN'S LEADERS MIGHT NOT
AGREE.
IRAN'S DEPUTY FOREIGN MINISTER
SAID ON STATE-TV THAT IRAN HAS
AGREED TO ALLOW UNITED NATIONS
INSPECTORS "MANAGED ACCESS" TO
MILITARY SITES.
THAT MEANS INSPECTORS WILL ONLY
BE ALLOWED TO TAKE ENVIRONMENTAL
SAMPLES NEAR THOSE AREAS.
BUT THAT CONTRADICTS WHAT IRAN'S
SUPREME LEADER SAID ABOUT THE
TALKS LAST WEEK.
HE VOWED NOT TO ALLOW ANY
FOREIGN ACCESS.
IRAN'S TOP MILITARY LEADERS ALSO
REFUSED TO COMPLY WITH SUCH
DEMANDS.
IN MALAYSIA, AUTHORITIES HAVE
REPORTEDLY FOUND AS MANY AS
THIRTY MASS GRAVES, POSSIBLY
FILLED WITH THE BODIES OF
HUNDREDS OF MIGRANTS.
OTHER MASS GRAVES WERE FOUND
EARLIER THIS MONTH-- MOST NEAR
SUSPECTED HUMAN TRAFFICKING
CAMPS ACROSS THE THAI BORDER.
OFF THE COAST, THOUSANDS OF
MIGRANTS ARE STILL REPORTEDLY
STRANDED AT SEA.
TODAY, POPE FRANCIS ENCOURAGED
THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY TO
PROVIDE HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE.
IN CENTRAL NEPAL, THOUSANDS OF
VILLAGERS ARE BEING TOLD TO GET
TO HIGHER GROUND.
OFFICIALS FEAR A LANDSLIDE THAT
BLOCKED A MAJOR RIVER COULD
EVENTUALLY TRIGGER A DEVASTATING
FLOOD FOR MILES DOWNSTREAM.
THE LANDSLIDE CREATED A NATURAL
DAM, AND THE RIVER HAS STARTED
TO OVERFLOW ITS BANKS.
THIS IS JUST THE LATEST
LANDSLIDE FOLLOWING THE 7.8
MAGNITUDE EARTHQUAKE THAT HIT
THE REGION ALMOST A MONTH AGO.
MORE FINANCIAL TROUBLE IN
GREECE, WHERE THE MINISTER OF
THE INTERIOR SAYS THE COUNTRY
WILL NOT BE ABLE TO MAKE THE
NEXT PAYMENT ON ITS MASSIVE DEBT
TO THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY
FUND.
GREECE WAS SUPPOSED TO SEND THE
I.M.F. 1.6 BILLION EUROS NEXT
MONTH TO PAY BACK ITS 2011 BAIL
OUT.
IF LEADERS CANNOT NEGOTIATE A
NEW PAYOFF DEAL, GREECE COULD BE
FORCED TO LEAVE THE EURO AND GO
BACK TO THE DRACHMA--
POTENTIALLY THROWING THE COUNTRY
INTO BANKRUPTCY.
IN CENTRAL TEXAS, DANGEROUS
WEATHER AND FLASH FLOODS HAVE
FORCED ABOUT 1,000 PEOPLE TO
EVACUATE.
RESCUE CREWS USED BOATS TO PULL
PEOPLE TO SAFETY ALONG THE
BLANCO RIVER ABOUT 40 MILES
SOUTHWEST OF AUSTIN.
HUNDREDS OF NEARBY HOMES ARE
REPORTEDLY DAMAGED.
SOME PARTS OF TEXAS HAVE GOTTEN
AS MUCH AS TEN INCHES OF RAIN IN
JUST THE PAST 24 HOURS.
TONIGHT, OFFICIALS ARE OPENING
EMERGENCY SHELTERS AND IMPOSING
A CURFEW TO KEEP DRIVERS OFF
FLOODED ROADS.
THE PIPELINE THAT SPILLED
THOUSANDS OF GALLONS OF CRUDE
OIL OFF THE CALIFORNIA COAST DID
NOT HAVE AN AUTOMATIC SHUT-OFF
VALVE.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS REPORTS THE
PIPE WAS THE ONLY ONE OF ITS
KIND IN SANTA BARBARA COUNTY
THAT WAS NOT REQUIRED TO HAVE AN
AUTOMATIC SHUT OFF VALVE.
THE PIPELINE'S ORIGINAL OWNER
FOUGHT THE COUNTY IN COURT BACK
IN THE '80s, TO AVOID ADDING
THE SAFETY VALVE-- AND WON.
FEDERAL REGULATORS ARE STILL
INVESTIGATING THE CAUSE OF THE
SPILL.
THE NOBEL PRIZE WINNING
MATHEMATICIAN WHOSE LIFE STORY
WAS THE SUBJECT OF THE ACADEMY
AWARD WINNING FILM "A BEAUTIFUL
MIND" DIED YESTERDAY IN A TAXI
ACCIDENT.
JOHN NASH BECAME KNOWN FOR HIS
ANALYSIS OF MODERN GAME
THEORY.
HE HAD BEEN DIAGNOSED WITH
SCHIZOPHRENIA IN THE LATE '50s.
NASH, 86, AND HIS WIFE ALICIA,
82, DIED WHEN THEIR CAB HIT A
GUARDRAIL ON THE NEW JERSEY
TURNPIKE.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ON THE LIFE OF
JOHN NASH LATER IN THE PROGRAM.
RETURNING TO THE GROWING FIGHT
AGAINST ISIS, NOW SPREADING INTO
SAUDI ARABIA.
YESTERDAY, THE ISLAMIC MILITANT
GROUP CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THE SUICIDE BOMBING AT A MOSQUE
FRIDAY.
AT LEAST 21 PEOPLE WERE KILLED
AND TODAY THE SAUDI KING VOWED
TO PUNISH THOSE INVOLVED.
WASHINGTON POST REPORTER ERIN
CUNNINGHAM JOINS ME VIA SKYPE
FROM CAIRO.
SO THERE HAS BEEN A HANDFUL OF
OTHER INCIDENTS IN THE SAUDI
KINGDOM OVER THE PAST SIX
MONTHS, HOW HAVE THE AUTHORITIES
CONNECTED THE DOTS?
>> WELL, THEY THINK THAT YOU
HAVE A NUMBER OF SAUDIS THAT
HAVE GONE TO IRAQ AND SYRIA TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE INSURGENCIES
THERE AND I THINK THIS IS HOW
THE ISLAMIC STATE WORKS.
THEY RECRUIT PEOPLE INSIDE THE
VARIOUS COUNTRIES, AND EITHER TO
CARRY OUT ATTACKS OR TO COME
BACK TO IRAQ AND SYRIA AND JOIN
THEM WHERE THEY ARE FIGHTING SO
I THINK THE SAUDIS WERE ABLE TO
SEE THIS, THAT THESE PEOPLE WHO
CARRIED OUT THESE ATTACKS OVER
THE PAST SIX MONTHS HAVE HAD
CONTACT WITH THE ISLAMIC STATE
AND THAT'S HOW THEY ARE GOING TO
IDENTIFY THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: PUT THIS IN
PERSPECTIVE FOR US.
THIS COMES IN THE CONTEXT OF
SUNNI, SHY A.
SHIA ATTENTION THAT ALREADY
EXISTS IN SAUDI ARABIA.
>> YES THEREIS A SHIA MINORITY
IN EASTERN SAUDI ARABIA THAT
LONG SAID THEY SUFFER FROM
NEGLECT FROM THE GOVERNMENT AND
ALSO SORT OF SECTARIAN
INSIGHTMENT FROM THE CLERGY
INSIDE SAUDI ARABIA SO THERE IS
ALREADY THIS SORT OF FESTERING
TENSION BETWEEN THE SHIA AND THE
GOVERNMENT AND I THINK THIS THE
SOMETHING THAT, THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT MIGHT MAKE THIS
WORSE, CERTAINLY.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THIS
SOMETHING TO TRY TO FIRE UP THE
SHIA BASE TO TRY TO THE TOP IT
WILL SUNNI KINGDOM FROM INSIDE?
>> I AM NOT SURE IF THAT IS
SOMETHING THAT THE ISLAMIC STATE
WOULD BE INTERESTED IN DOING OR
IF THEY HAVE THE SKILLS OR THE
INTELLIGENCE TO DO SOMETHING
LIKE THAT, BUT I BELIEVE THAT AS
LONG AS THERE ARE TENSIONS, AS
LONG AS PEOPLE INSIDE SAUDI
ARABIA AND THE GOVERNMENT ARE
AFRAID OF IRANIAN STATE ATTACKS
THEN THAT WORKS TO THEIR
ADVANTAGE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND OF COURSE
THIS IS THE SITE OF TWO OF
ISLAM'S MOST HOLY CITIES,
MEDINA, AND YOU CAN'T HAVE A
CALIPHATE WITHOUT THOSE TWO VERY
IMPORTANT SITES.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I MEAN, IT IS VERY SYMBOLIC AND
VERY IMPORTANT.
I MEAN, EVEN AL QAEDA HAD SAUDI
ARABIA AS A PRIMARY TARGET FOR
THEIR OWN ATTACKS.
SO I THINK THAT IF THE ISLAMIC
STATE CAN CARRY OUT ATTACKS IN
SAUDI ARABIA CERTAINLY THEY WILL
BECAUSE IT IS A PROPAGANDA
VICTORY FOR THEM EVEN IF THEY
CAN'T GET INSIDE TO TAKE
TERRITORY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
ERIN CUNNINGHAM OF THE
WASHINGTON POST JOIN US VIA
SKYPE FROM CAIRO TONIGHT.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
RETURNING NOW TO THE DEATH OF
NOBEL PRIZE WINNING
MATHEMATICIAN JOHN NASH.
I'M JOINED BY NASH'S COLLEAGUE
AND FRIEND, ROBBERT DIJKGRAAF,
DIRECTOR OF THE INSTITUTE FOR
ADVANCED STUDY IN NEW JERSEY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO FIRST OFF,
MY CONDOLENCES TO YOU.
WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO MISS MOST
ABOUT YOUR COLLEAGUE AND FRIEND?
>> OH, JOE NASH WAS SUCH A
PRESENCE HERE IN PRINCETON, IT
IS A SMALL COMMUNITY AND HE WAS
A GENIUS OF A DIFFERENT KIND,
SOMEBODY WHO TOTALLY TRANSFORMED
MATHEMATICS, BUT PROGRAMS MOST
IMPORTANT HE WAS SUCH A GENTLE
AND MODEST MAN, A GREAT
INSPIRATION I THINK FOR ALL
MATHEMATICIANS, SCIENTISTS AND
HUMAN BEINGS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT WAS IT
ABOUT HIS GENIUS THAT INSPIRED
GENERATIONS OF MATHEMATICIANS,
WHAT MADE HIM, HIM?
>> WELL, I THINK MANY SCIENTISTS
AND MATHEMATICIANS THEY TRY TO
KIND OF CLIMB A MOUNTAIN THAT IS
SOMEWHERE OUT THERE AND THERE IS
A PATH, ALTHOUGH IT MIGHT BE
VERY DIFFICULT, JOHN NASH WAS A
MATHEMATICIAN WHO JUST PICKED
HIS OWN MOUNTAINS AND PRODUCED
RESULTS THAT NOBODY EXPECTED,
THAT ACTUALLY MANY PEOPLE
THOUGHT WERE IMPOSSIBLE, AND IN
THAT SENSE HE OPENED UP ENTIRELY
NEW WORLDS IT COULD HAVE BEEN IN
ECONOMICS, IT COULD HAVE BEEN IN
VERY ABSTRACT MATHEMATICS AND
GEOMETRY.
HE REALLY KIND OF TOUCHED SO
MANY DIFFERENT FIELDS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO HELP
SOMEBODY IN THE TELEVISION
AUDIENCE UNDERSTAND KIND OF THE
LONG-TERM IMPACT OF JOHN NASH'S
WORK ON GAME THEORY OR HOW IT
AFFECTS OUR LIVES TODAY.
>> JOHN NASH BASICALLY PROVED
THAT IF YOU HAVE A COMPLICATED
GAME, AS COMPLICATED AS IT CAN
BE WITH MANY PLAYERS WITH VERY
MANY DIFFERENT STRATEGIES THERE
IS ALWAYS KIND OF AN OPTIMAL
FORM WHERE BASICALLY EVERYBODY
GETS THE RESULT AT BEST AS THEY
CAN GET, AND ACTUALLY THIS IS
VERY INTERESTING MATHEMATICALLY
THAT IT EXISTS BUT IT IS USED
EVERYWHERE.
IT IS USED WHEN THERE ARE LIVE
AUCTIONS, WHETHER IT IS SELLING
GOODS OR SELLING, IT IS
BASICALLY UNDERLYING ALL OF
MATHEMATICAL ECONOMICAL THEORY
AT THIS MOMENT, AND IT IS KIND
OF AMAZING THAT SOMEBODY WHO HAD
A PURE MATHEMATICAL MIND WAS
ABLE TO SOLVE THIS PROBLEM IN
SUCH, AND HAD SUCH ENORMOUS
IMPACTS ON OUR LIVES.
>> Sreenivasan: PEOPLE WHO
HAVE SEEN A BEAUTIFUL MIND OR
HAGGLED FOR A PRICE UNDERSTAND
HIS IMPACT ON GAME THEORY, KIND
OF MATHEMATIZING OUR DECISION
MAKING BUT HE WAS ACTUALLY ON
HIS WAY BACK DURING THIS
ACCIDENT FROM AN EVEN BIGGER
MATHEMATICAL PRIZE SO HE WAS
STILL .. ACCOMPLISHING FEATS
FEATS THAT MOST OF US HAVE NEVER
HEARD ABOUT.
>> YES, AS I SAID HE WAS THE
ONLY MATHEMATICIAN .. TO WIN THE
NOBEL PRIZE.
HE JUST WON THE ABEL PRIZE
WHICH IS REALLY AN AWARD THAT
RECOGNIZES -- I THINK IT IS VERY
IMPORTANT TO REALIZE THAT HE WAS
A VERY BOLD MATHEMATICIAN, WHO
HAD THIS KIND OF UNIQUE ABILITY
TO TOUCH BOTH OUR ORDINARY LIVES
THROUGH HIS WORK IN GAME THEORY
BUT ALSO A VERY, VERY DEEP
MATHEMATICAL PROBLEMS, THINKING
ABOUT SPACES AND ARBITRARY
NUMBER OF DIMENSIONS, THINKING
ABOUT THE EQUATIONS, VERY
DIFFICULT DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
THAT ALSO GOVERN LARGE PARTS OF
OUR WORLD.
HE HAD, IN THAT SENSE, I THINK
THAT THE RECOGNITION OF HIS
ALMOST UNIVERSAL MATHEMATICAL
TALENT CAME AT THIS MOMENT.
HOWEVER, IT IS UNFORTUNATE HIS
PASSING IS, I AM VERY HAPPY THAT
HE GOT HIS RECOGNITION AS ONE OF
THE GREAT ESTIMATE PETITIONS,
MATHEMATICIANS OF OUR TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: AND ALSO MERE
THE END OF HIS LIFE HIS ADVOCACY
ON BEHALF OF MENTAL ILLNESS,
WHICH I THINK WILL BE PART OF
HIS LEGACY.
>> YES.
AND SUCH AN UPLIFTING STORY.
I MEAN, HERE, WE HAVE SEEN OF
COURSE THROUGH MANY DECADES AND
ALSO IN HIS DIFFICULT PERIODS
AND HE WAS ALWAYS AROUND, AND
THE FACT THAT SOMEBODY WHO CAN,
KIND OF PUSHES HIS OWN INTELLECT
SO FAR, MORE THAN ANYBODY COULD
POSSIBLY GO, AND THEN KIND OF
CLIMBS BACK AND RECOVERS, AND
THOUGH IT IS REALLY KIND OF A
GREAT A DRAMA, BUT IT IS ALSO A
VERY UPLIFTING STORY AND I THINK
THERE WERE, THE MENTAL HEALTH
WILL BE RECOGNIZED AND WILL BE
REMEMBERED AND A GREAT
INSPIRATION TO MANY OF US.
>> Sreenivasan: ROBBERT
DIJKGRAAF FROM THE ADVANCED
MATHEMATICS AT PRINCETON, THANKS
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
COLORADO HAS COLLECTED TENS OF
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN TAX
REVENUES SINCE IT LEGALIZED
MARIJUANA.
TO MANY, THE ECONOMIC BENEFIT IS
CLEAR.
BUT IN SOME NEIGHBORING STATES,
THE POT POLICY IS ACTUALLY
COSTING THEM MONEY-- SO THEY'RE
TAKING THEIR CASE TO COURT.
THIS UPDATED STORY ORIGINALLY
AIRED IN FEBRUARY.
ALISON STEWART REPORTS FROM
NEBRASKA.
>> Reporter: ADAM HAYWARD IS THE
SHERIFF OF DEUEL COUNTY,
NEBRASKA, WHICH IS RIGHT BY THE
STATE LINE WITH COLORADO.
SHERIFF HAYWARD SAYS HIS WORK
HASN'T BEEN THE SAME SINCE
COLORADO LEGALIZED RECREATIONAL
MARIJUANA.
>> KEEP IT OVER THERE.
IT'S STILL ILLEGAL HERE.
WE DON'T HAVE A CHOICE.
WE HAVE TO ENFORCE THE LAW.
>> Reporter: THE SHERIFF SAYS
HE'S ARRESTED ALL SORTS OF
PEOPLE CARRYING MARIJUANA BACK
FROM COLORADO ALONG INTERSTATE
76: TEENAGERS MAKING WEEKEND
RUNS TO DENVER AND ONCE A 67
YEAR OLD GRANDMOTHER.
WITH EACH ARREST THE SHERIFF
COLLECTS MORE AND MORE
MARIJUANA.
IT IS CATALOGED AND THEN STORED
IN THE DEUEL COUNTY JAIL CELL.
>> NOW WE KEEP OUR EVIDENCE
HERE.
>> Reporter: WHICH YOU CAN
SMELL.
>> YES.
>> Reporter: THE SHERIFF SAYS
THAT BATCH OF POT CAME FROM A
MARIJUANA GROWING FACILITY IN
COLORADO.
HE'S ALSO RECOVERED LOTS OF
EDIBLE PRODUCTS IN CARS HE PULLS
OVER ON I-76.
THE NUMBER OF MARIJUANA CASES IS
SOARING.
IN 2011 WHEN COLORADO ONLY SOLD
MEDICAL CANNABIS, THE SHERIFF
STOPPED SOMEONE COMING BACK FROM
COLORADO WITH POT LESS THAN ONCE
A WEEK.
LAST YEAR WHEN RECREATIONAL
CANNABIS BECAME LEGAL, THE
SHERIFF'S COUNTY HAD MORE THAN
ONE MARIJUANA CASE A WEEK.
EARLIER THIS YEAR, THERE WERE AT
LEAST FIVE CASES A WEEK.
>> WE JUST GO OUT AND STOP CARS
FOR NORMAL TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
AND IT SEEMS TO BE THAT THERE
ARE SO MANY PEOPLE THAT ARE
GOING OVER TO GET THIS YOU JUST
CAN'T HELP BUT RUN INTO IT JUST
BY STOPPING A FEW CARS.
>> Reporter: WHAT HASN'T CHANGED
IS THE NUMBER OF OFFICERS
WORKING IN DEUEL COUNTY: THREE
FULL TIME AND TWO PART TIME
OFFICERS.
THE SHERIFF SAYS HIS COUNTY IS
BEING STRETCHED THIN.
>> WELL, WE'RE A SMALL
DEPARTMENT.
WE USUALLY HAVE ONE PERSON ON AT
A TIME.
SO IF THEY RUN ACROSS SOMETHING
THEN THEY'RE HAVING TO CALL
SOMEBODY OUT.
WELL, THEN YOU'RE PAYING
OVERTIME, AND WHERE WE'VE HAD
MORE ARRESTS AND MORE PEOPLE IN
JAIL, YOU KNOW, IT TAKES MORE
TIME IN THE COURT.
YOU KNOW, WE'RE HAVING TO
TRANSPORT PRISONERS BACK AND
FORTH, HAVE MORE PEOPLE IN THE
COURTROOM FOR SECURITY.
SO IT TIES UP OUR TIME DEALING
WITH THESE VERSUS, YOU KNOW, WE
COULD BE DOING OTHER THINGS,
PATROLLING IN TOWN.
>> Reporter: IT TAKES UP TIME
AND MONEY.
AFTER AN ARREST, REGARDLESS OF
WHETHER THE PERSON IS FROM
NEBRASKA, COLORADO OR ELSEWHERE,
THE COUNTY PICKS UP THE BILL FOR
HOUSING AND MEDICAL TREATMENT
FOR THOSE IN CUSTODY, AS WELL AS
THE COST OF HIRING A PUBLIC
DEFENDER.
SHERIFF HAYWARD SAYS HIS ANNUAL
JAIL BUDGET HAS ALMOST TRIPLED-
UP NEARLY $100,000 SINCE 2011.
>> WHEN YOU HAVE SOMETHING JUMP
UP $100,000, THAT'S A PRETTY BIG
INCREASE FOR 2,000 PEOPLE TO
COVER.
>> Reporter: HOW ARE YOU CLOSING
THAT GAP FINANCIALLY?
>> BASICALLY OUT HERE, I MEAN,
ALL THE TAX REVENUE IS GENERATED
FROM PROPERTY TAXES.
SO IF THE COUNTY NEEDS MORE
MONEY THEY HAVE TO RAISE THE
PROPERTY TAXES, AND, YOU KNOW,
IT GOES BACK TO THE TAXPAYERS.
>> Reporter: NEBRASKA LAW ENDS
HERE AT THE COLORADO BORDER.
SO WHILE SHERIFF HAYWARD IS
DOING HIS JOB JUST OVER THERE IN
THE CORNHUSKER STATE, OVER HERE
THE OWNER OF THE FIRST
DISPENSARY BY COLORADO'S NORTH
BORDER IS DOING HIS.
>> I'M CURRENTLY EMPLOYING NINE
PEOPLE FULL TIME.
>> Reporter: MIKE KOLLARTIS OWNS
A MARIJUANA DISPENSARY IN
SEDGWICK, COLORADO, A TOWN ABOUT
SEVEN MILES FROM THE BORDER.
HIS STORE, SEDGWICK ALTERNATIVE
RELIEF, WHICH SELLS BOTH MEDICAL
AND RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA, IS
NEWLY RENOVATED.
IT STANDS OUT ALONG THIS MAIN
STREET THAT HAS SEEN BETTER
DAYS.
IT HAS BECOME THE MAIN DRAW TO
THIS QUIET TOWN OF 150 PEOPLE.
>> THEY'RE PRETTY HAPPY ABOUT
THE RENOVATIONS I'VE DONE, THE
EMPLOYMENT I'VE BROUGHT, THE
DOLLARS, THE TAX REVENUE DOLLARS
ARE OUTSTANDING.
>> OH MY GOODNESS.
IT'S BEEN GOOD.
>> Reporter: LUPE PENA CASIAS
OWNS A RESTAURANT AND INN ACROSS
THE STREET.
SHE SAYS THE TOWN HAS SEEN A
HUGE FINANCIAL BOOST BECAUSE
EACH TIME THERE'S A MARIJUANA
SALE AT THE STORE, THE TOWN OF
SEDGWICK GETS A FIVE DOLLAR
TRANSACTION FEE.
AND AS LONG AS THE DISPENSARY IS
OPEN, THE CUSTOMERS KEEP COMING.
>> IT'S BUSY, BUSY, BUSY OVER
THERE AND BUSY, BUSY, BUSY HERE.
>> Reporter: EMPLOYEES AT THE
STORE ARE TRAINED TO LOOK OUT
FOR CUSTOMERS WHO MIGHT BREAK
THE LAW.
THE DISPENSARY ALSO DISPLAYS
SIGNS DETAILING THE MARIJUANA
LAWS OF COLORADO AND NEIGHBORING
STATES.
YET THERE IS STILL AN INFLUX OF
POT COMING INTO NEBRASKA AND
OKLAHOMA.
SO THE ATTORNEYS GENERAL OF BOTH
STATES FILED A LAWSUIT IN THE
U.S. SUPREME COURT IN DECEMBER,
ALLEGING THAT THEY, "HAVE
SUFFERED DIRECT AND SIGNIFICANT
HARM ARISING FROM THE INCREASED
PRESENCE OF COLORADO-SOURCED
MARIJUANA."
NEBRASKA AND OKLAHOMA ALSO
CONTEND THAT COLORADO'S
MARIJUANA LAW "DIRECTLY
CONFLICTS WITH FEDERAL LAW AND
UNDERMINES THE AREA OF DRUG
CONTROL AND ENFORCEMENT."
AND SO BOTH STATES ARE ASKING
THE SUPREME COURT TO DECLARE
COLORADO'S MARIJUANA LAW
UNCONSTITUTIONAL AND IN DOING
SO, UNDO COLORADO'S MARIJUANA
REGULATORY SYSTEM.
BUT THIS PAST MARCH, COLORADO
ASKED THE SUPREME COURT TO DROP
THE LAWSUIT.
WASHINGTON AND OREGON- STATES
THAT ALSO LEGALIZED THE
POSSESSION AND SALE OF
MARIJUANA, IMMEDIATELY CAME OUT
IN SUPPORT OF COLORADO'S
REQUEST.
THE SUPREME COURT HAS YET TO
DECIDE WHETHER TO TAKE UP THE
CASE.
BILL KELLY IS A REPORTER WITH
NEBRASKA'S PUBLIC RADIO STATION
N.E.T. WHO'S BEEN COVERING THE
ISSUE.
WE VIDEO CHATTED WITH HIM
BECAUSE HE'S BASED IN THE
STATE'S CAPITOL LINCOLN, OVER
300 MILES AWAY FROM WHERE WE
WERE REPORTING AT THE
NEBRASKA/COLORADO BORDER.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA, OBVIOUSLY,
HAS BEEN AROUND FOR A LONG TIME
IN COLORADO, AND EVERYONE SAW
THAT RECREATIONAL WAS COMING
DOWN THE PIPELINE.
WHY DIDN'T NEBRASKA LEGISLATORS
GET MORE INVOLVED IN DEALING
WITH THIS POROUS BORDER ISSUE
EARLIER?
>> I'M NOT CERTAIN NEBRASKA
POLICY MAKERS WERE REALLY
PREPARED FOR WHAT WAS GOING TO
HAPPEN.
YOU WERE STARTING TO SEE MORE
POSSESSION CASES, YOU WERE
STARTING TO SEE MORE DRIVING
UNDER THE INFLUENCE CASES.
BUT THERE WAS, I THINK, A LITTLE
BIT OF THE DEER-IN-THE-
HEADLIGHTS FEELING THAT WE DON'T
KNOW WHAT THE APPROPRIATE
RESPONSE IS.
>> Reporter: SOME NEBRASKAN
LAWMAKERS BELIEVE THAT THE
APPROPRIATE RESPONSE IS TO
CHANGE THE STATE'S MARIJUANA
LAWS.
BUT THERE ARE MANY DIFFERENT
IDEAS ABOUT WHAT TO DO: ONE
WOULD BE TO LEGALIZE MEDICAL
CANNABIS WHILE ANOTHER WOULD
INCREASE THE FINES FOR EDIBLE
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS.
THE PENALTIES IN NEBRASKA DEPEND
ON HOW MUCH POT IS IN YOUR
POSSESSION.
A FIRST TIME OFFENSE, UNDER AN
OUNCE, IS A $300 FINE.
MORE THAN AN OUNCE BUT LESS THAN
A POUND IS A MISDEMEANOR WITH
POSSIBLE JAIL TIME AND A FINE.
BUT MORE THAN A POUND IS A
FELONY WITH A MAXIMUM FIVE YEARS
IN PRISON AND OR A $10,000 FINE.
WHILE NEBRASKA DELIBERATES
WHETHER TO ALLOW MARIJUANA OR
KEEP IT OUT OF THE STATE, SOME
RESIDENTS LIKE JEREMY CRARY FIND
THEMSELVES CAUGHT BETWEEN THE
LAWS OF NEBRASKA AND COLORADO.
NINE YEARS AGO CRARY ACCIDENTLY
SHOT HIMSELF IN THE HEAD WHILE
PLAYING WITH A GUN.
AFTER PAINFUL SURGERIES AND
PHYSICAL THERAPY, HE SPENT YEARS
ON MORE THAN A DOZEN MEDICATIONS
AND RECEIVED REGULAR SHOTS OF
BOTOX FOR SEVERE MUSCLE SPASMS,
BUT RECENTLY HE STARTED TAKING
MEDICAL CANNABIS INSTEAD.
HE SAYS IT'S THE MOST EFFECTIVE
IN RELIEVING HIS PAIN AND
SPASMS.
>> I JUST QUIT TAKING ALL MY
PAIN PILLS THEY PRESCRIBED ME
AND STUFF.
>> Reporter: CRARY HAS MADE
SEVERAL TRIPS ACROSS THE BORDER
TO MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES.
HE SAYS THE STRAINS OF MARIJUANA
HE CAN LEGALLY PURCHASE IN
COLORADO ARE BETTER FOR HIS PAIN
THAN WHAT HE CAN GET ILLEGALLY
IN HIS AREA.
WHAT'S IT LIKE FOR YOU TO
KNOWINGLY BREAK THE LAW WHEN
YOU'RE DRIVING BACK FROM
COLORADO WITH SOME WEED IN YOUR
CAR HEADING HOME?
>> I MEAN, IT MAKES YOU FEEL
LIKE A CRIMINAL.
I HATE IT.
I NEVER KNOW WHETHER THE NEXT
COP'S GONNA BE SO I'M ALWAYS
LOOKING AROUND.
>> Reporter: WE SPOKE TO A
SHERIFF OF DEUEL COUNTY WHICH IS
ONE OF THOSE COUNTIES YOU HAVE
TO DRIVE THROUGH TO GET BACK
THIS WAY.
ARE YOU CONCERNED AT ALL ABOUT
BEING PART OF THAT GROUP THAT'S
BREAKING THE LAW OR THAT'S
CAUSING HIM AND TAXPAYERS IN
THAT TOWN A PROBLEM?
>> NO, NOT REALLY.
>> Reporter: WHY NOT?
>> I'M NOT LOOKING TO JUST GET
HIGH.
I'M NOT TRYING TO BRING IT BACK
AND SELL IT.
I'M JUST TRYING TO RELIEVE
MYSELF OF HAVING TO USE
PHARMACEUTICALS TO HAVE A DECENT
LIFE.
>> Reporter: IF PEOPLE ARE
MAKING THE EFFORT TO ACTUALLY GO
BUY THIS LEGALLY IN COLORADO AS
OPPOSED TO BREAKING TWO LAWS IN
NEBRASKA, "I'M GONNA BUY IT
ILLEGALLY AND THEN I'M GONNA USE
IT ILLEGALLY."
SHOULDN'T THERE BE SOME SORT OF
ELASTICITY TO THE PUNISHMENT?
>> NO, I MEAN, IT'S LEGAL OVER
THERE.
THAT'S FINE.
IF YOU WANNA BUY IT OVER THERE,
USE IT OVER THERE.
DON'T COME BACK HERE WITH IT
BECAUSE IT'S ILLEGAL.
>> Reporter: THE SHERIFF SAYS
HE'S SEEING MORE D.U.I.D.s--
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF
DRUGS.
HE'S ALSO BEEN VISITING LOCAL
SCHOOLS WITH CONFISCATED
MARIJUANA EDIBLES TO SHOW
TEACHERS WHAT STUDENTS MIGHT
POSSESS.
AND HE EXPECTS HE'LL SPEND MORE
TIME ON INTERSTATE 76 UNTIL THIS
UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCE IS
RESOLVED.
>> Sreenivasan: IN CHINA, THE
COST OF RENTING OR BUYING A HOME
IN BEIJING IS SO HIGH THAT MANY
LOW-WAGE WORKERS HAVE BEEN
FORCED TO LIVE UNDERGROUND.
THEIR LIVING SPACES-- IN
TUNNELS, BASEMENTS AND OLD AIR
RAID SHELTERS OFTEN LACK FRESH
AIR AND SUNLIGHT.
THOSE WHO INHABIT THESE PLACES
MAKE UP THE SO-CALLED "RAT
TRIBE".
I.T.N.'S CHINA CORRESPONDENT
LUCY WATSON REPORTS.
>> SO THIS IS THE PIPE AND THIS
IS WHERE MY WIFE AND I SLEEP, HE
TELLS ME.
THEY ARE THE UNDERGROUND
BASEMENT -- THE DARK, DANK
TUNNELS, AND OLD PASSAGEWAYS
THAN TWIST UNDERNEATH CHINA'S
CAPITAL.
>> IT IS AN EXISTENCE OF FILTH
AND DARKNESS.
THEY HAVE NO RUNNING WATER.
SHE IS A RUBBISH COLLECTOR, HIS
WIFE A CLEANER.
HIS SON, A DELIVERY BOY.
THIS IS A KITCHEN, A DINING ROOM
AND A BEDROOM.
THE WHOLE FAMILY'S RENT COSTS
80 POUNDS A MONTH.
>> MY HOMETOWN, MOST PEOPLE ARE
FARMERS BUT MY GENERATION WANTS
A BETTER FUTURE SO I AM HERE TO
TRY.
I WISH THE GOVERNMENT WILL HELP
US BUT IT IS HOPELESS.
>> Reporter: AROUND 20,000 OF
THESE SHELTERS EXIST IN BEIJING
AND THEY ARE ILLEGAL, BUT THE
AUTHORITIES TURN A BLIND EYE TO
THE PROBLEM, BECAUSE THERE IS
NOWHERE ELSE FOR THESE PEOPLE TO
LIVE, YET THEIR LOWER PAID WORK
IS NEEDED HERE.
ITV NEWS ALSO GAINED ACCESS TO
FORMER BOMB SHELTERS, THOUSANDS
LIVE IN THEM AND LANDLORDS STILL
OPERATE THEM AND -- THOSE WHO
FORM THE BACKBONE OF BEIJING'S
ECONOMY.
HE WORKS THE STREETS BY DAY, BUT
ARE FORCED BENEATH THEM AT
NIGHT.
ITV NEWS, BEIJING.
>>
>> Sreenivasan: BEFORE WE
LEAVE YOU TONIGHT, ACTRESS AND
COMEDIAN ANNA MIRRA HAS DIED AT
THE AGE OF 85, SHE IS SURVIVED
BY HER HUSBAND AND COMEDY
PARTNER JERRY STILLER AND HER
SON ACTOR BEN STILLER.
CURRENTLY ON THE NEWSHOUR
WEBSITE, A NAVY VETERAN WHO
SKYDIVES WITH VETERANS FROM
EVERY U.S. WAR SINCE WORLD WAR
II, TO RAISE AWARENESS FOR
COMBAT BURN VICTIMS.
ON THE NEWSHOUR BROADCAST
TOMORROW ON MEMORIAL DAY, SOME
PERSPECTIVES ON AFGHANISTAN,
AMERICA'S LONGEST WAR, PLUS A
LOOK AT HOW THE WAR THERE AND IN
IRAQ IMPACT MILITARY FAMILIES
BACK ON THE HOME FRONT.
I AM HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.